Junior Track LearnWeb3DAO
https://www.learnweb3.io/tracks/junior/layer-2s

Layer 1
A Layer-1 blockchain (also known as the parent chain or root chain) is typically a name used to describe a main blockchain network protocol such as Ethereum or Bitcoin. Layer-1 blockchains are simply the main network that a Layer-2 scaling solution attaches to in order to improve the scalability and transaction throughput of the main chain, or Layer 1. T

Layer 2
Layer 2 refers to a secondary framework or protocol that is built on top of an existing blockchain system. Major cryptocurrency networks such as Ethereum face transaction speed and scaling difficulties. Bitcoin and Ethereum are still not able to process thousands of transactions per second. Additionally, these layer 2 solutions usually offer much better transaction fees.

Therefore, a major consideration for a layer 2 solution is how transactions are validated and confirmed before being moved to the main chain.

Layer 2 Scaling Solutions

There are two main dimensions where Layer 2 scaling solutions differ from each other. The first is transaction execution and the second is data availability.

Transaction execution strategies deal with how transactions are run, where they are run, what the trust environments are, what the security and decentralization environments are, etc.
Data availability strategies deal with whether or not the Layer 2 solution makes their transaction data available on the main Layer 1 chain or not.

We will look at the following categories:
1. State Channels
2. Side Chains
3. Rollups
    * Optimistic Rollups (ORs)
    * Zero-Knowledge Rollups (ZKRs)
    * ZKR vs OR
4. Plasma
5. Validiums
6. Volitions

State Channels

State channels were the first widespread scaling approach for blockchains. State channels are used when two or more users want to do a bunch of transactions in a trusted setting without paying gas every single time.

Ex: Tic tac toe games, Artist receive royalties on Spotify each month…

Side Chains
A side chain is an independent EVM-compatible blockchain which runs in parallel to a main blockchain, and has a channel to Layer 1. A side chain has its own validators and consensus method of adding blocks. Side chains accumulate transactions quickly and cheaply and summarize them to the main chain via a bridge or channel.

The drawbacks of side chains are that they can be more centralized.

Important to note that, unlike other solutions below, side chains are technically not layer 2 because they do not use the security of the main chain, but are often referred to as such.

Rollups
Rollups are solutions that perform transaction execution on Layer 2 but post transaction data onto Layer 1, in a bundled or summarized form. Think of rollups as a "squash and merge" operation.
Rollups work by deploying a set of smart contracts on Layer 1 that are responsible for deposits, withdraws, and verifying proofs. Proofs are the main distinction between different types of rollups. In general, there are two kinds of rollups: Optimistic Rollups and Zero-Knowledge Rollups.

Optimistic Rollups
In optimistic rollups, batches of transaction data are posted to the main chain and presumed to be valid by default (hence the name optimistic) but can be challenged by other users.

we introduce 3 players in this space:
1. asserter - the proposer attempting to post a proof of transactions on the main chain, thereby asserting their validity
2. challenger - the user trying to prove that the proof posted by the asserter is fraudulent
3. verifier - a smart contract on the main chain that verifies the proof and checks it's validity

ZK Rollups
ZK stands for "Zero Knowledge" and it's a method by which one party (the prover) can prove to another party (the verifier) that a given statement is true while the prover avoids conveying any additional information apart from the fact that the statement is indeed true. More on Zero Knowledge Proofs.

In particular, the proposer constructs a certain kind of zero knowledge proof, called a zk-SNARK, which is a non-interactive zero knowledge proof, meaning that this proof requires no interaction between the prover and the verifier.

ZK vs Optimistic
At first glance, ZK rollups seem better in every way than optimistic rollups. After all, transactions can be verified automatically, without the need for challengers, and the asserters prove their own transactions before submitting them.

So, why have optimistic rollups at all?

The problem with ZK rollups is that it is difficult to construct these proofs, mathematically speaking. Every use case requires research time to find a matching cryptographic proof, which can take a long time to find.
Furthermore, ZK proofs are often complex and therefore expensive to verify. The more operations the smart contract contains, the more expensive it is to run.

Plasma
Plasma is a framework for building scalable, layer 2 applications. Plasma uses a lot of the above ideas in its applications. The building blocks of plasma are off-chain executions, state commitments, and entry/exits to the main chain. A plasma chain is a separate, child blockchain that is anchored to the main Ethereum chain. 

Plasma chains use various fraud proofs to arbitrate disputes, just like optimistic rollups. Like side chains, plasma chains have their own consensus algorithm and create blocks of transactions. 

 Merkle trees enable creation of a limitless stack of these chains that can work to offload bandwidth from the parent chains (including Mainnet). Plasma chains do as much work as possible off-chain.

Plasma chains only interact with the main chain to commit their state, or to facilitate entry and exit. Since most implementations of plasma are an entirely different blockchain, it must facilitate entering and exiting the chain from the main chain, which is facilitated by smart contracts. 

Actually, one of the big downsides with plasma networks is that it's more difficult to withdraw assets from it to the main chain. Withdrawals are delayed by several days to allow for challenges, as with optimistic rollups. 

For fungible assets this can be mitigated by liquidity providers, but there is an associated capital cost. This is because assets on plasma networks are not exactly the same as the assets on the main chain. For example, you do not hold ETH on plasma, you usually hold wETH (wrapped ETH), which has a 1:1 value to ETH.

To use Plasma, you can integrate one of several projects that have implemented Plasma, for example Polygon, which was formally called Matic.

Data-Availability
However, another dimension in which Layer 2's have varying tradeoffs is data availability. On main chains, we are used to having all data being posted publicly on the blockchain. This, however, carries along with it significant privacy issues.

For example, if a professional trading firm was trading massive amounts on money on a DEX, they likely do not want their trading strategies to be made public, otherwise it's not useful to them anymore.

NOTE: On-chain and off-chain in this context particularly refers to the MAIN Layer 1 chain. On-chain means data is available on the Layer 1 main chain, and off-chain means it is NOT available on the Layer 1 main chain, though it may be available on the Layer 2 chain.

Validium Chains
Validium works very similar to ZK rollups except data is stored off the main chain. Since transaction data is not published on the main chain, this introduces new trust assumptions as users must trust an operator to make data available when it is needed. This

It is important to note that Validium is a type of data-availability situation, and does not concern itself with how transactions are executed.

Volition Chains
Volition chains are those which are the birthchild of Rollups and Validium data-availability approaches. Essentially, they allow for a hybrid data-availability scenario where users can decide what they want on the main chain and what they do not want on the main chain.

For example, a large trading firm may not want every single trade it makes to be available publicly on the main chain, but at the end of the week require a proof to be posted on the main-chain to inherit it's security benefits.

Again, similar to Validiums, this is just a data-availability situation, and does not concern itself with how the transactions are executed. Typically, you can use a Volition approach with ZKR's.

Examples of Layer 2

Immutable X
Immutable X is a Layer 2 scaling solution for NFTs on Ethereum. It allows developers to build marketplaces, games, apps, and more. While Ethereum handles only about 15 transactions per second and suffers from high-gas fees, an Layer 2 solution like Immutable X handles 9,000 transactions per second with zero gas fees. It leverages Ethereum’s well-developed security, connections, and ecosystem to help developers.

Polygon (formerly Matic)
Polygon is a plasma-based, EVM-compatible, layer 2 scaling solution that makes use of proof-of-stake, side chains, and more. It is one of the most popular Ethereum L2 solutions out there today. For brief introductions to it, you should read New to Polygon? and Polygon Architecture.
We will have more practical examples of using Polygon in future modules.

Arbitrum
Arbitrum is an optimistic rollup solution for general purpose smart contracts on Ethereum. It is EVM-compatible, and developers can easily port their existing Solidity code to Arbitrum.

Optimism
Optimism is also an optimistic rollup solution for general purpose smart contracts on Ethereum. It is also EVM-compatible, and develoeprs can port their existing Solidity code to Optimism.
Arbitrum and Optimism differ in some low-level nitty-gritty technical details, but on the surface, they both operate within the same category.

zkSync
zkSync is a ZK-Rollup solution for Ethereum. Since generalized ZK-Rollups are extremely hard, currently zkSync supports ETH and ERC20 token transfers, NFTs, atomic swaps, and orderbook based DEX's.
and many more... This is not an exhaustive list, and there are many more Layer 2 solutions out there competing for attention and market share, differing in technical details on low-level implementations. You can probably find hundreds if you look online.

The ETH network ugprade and Layer 2's
As we get closer to the ETH network upgrade (previously referred to as Eth2), a common question to ask is "will layer 2's still be relevant?"
The short answer is yes.
The long answer requires us looking at what the ETH upgrade is bringing to the table, and why it benefits Layer 2's.


With the ETH upgrade, ETH is focused on enabling data sharding. Essentially this means that the single state of the network will be broken down into smaller sets of data called shards, and the goal is to reduce storage costs by making storage more accessible to the network. The consequence of doing this is that when rollups post proofs back to the main chain, it will be cheaper for the rollup to do so.

Gas costs on rollup chains are currently limited by gas costs of storage on the main chain. Even though the computation on layer 2's is very cheap, posting proofs to the main chain still requires paying gas on Ethereum to store the proof. If storage costs on Ethereum go down, then cost of using rollup chains also goes down as proofs can be posted for cheaper. This will incentivize more people to use Layer 2 chains, and direct demand of Ethereum data storage will go down, which will further decrease storage costs on Ethereum even more, and so on.

Therefore, the ETH upgrade will actually help secure Layer 2 solutions gain adoption and become even cheaper to use.